Hello, everyone. Welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll.
One thing we do a lot here on Mindscape, or for that matter, I do in my life, otherwise,
even off the podcast, is to try to explain difficult concepts in physics to a broad audience,
right? Whether it's quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, relativity, cosmology, what have you,
taking these ideas that have been developed by lots of smart people over many years and bringing
them to a broader audience, which I think is very important and is absolutely doable if you put
the effort into it. But many people try to do this. We're not the only ones who try to do this.
And there are a couple of patterns which are kind of bad that many physicists or scientists more
broadly fall into when they're trying to explain their concepts to a broader audience. One is,
just from the fact that scientists, physicists, but also other kinds of scientists or other
kinds of academics, for that matter, are typically professors. They are college professors. And they've
developed a pretty good set of techniques for teaching students who are going to major in that
area, right? So physics professors, as part of their job, will teach young undergraduates,
and then up to graduate students, how to be a physicist. So they know what steps they have
to go through. They've taken the courses themselves. They've taught the course or they've read the
textbook or whatever. There's a set of ideas you have to march through. And one failure mode,
I would say, for reaching out to the public is people try to take that way of teaching physics,
the way that we teach our undergraduates, and just water it down, right? Teach exactly the same
stuff, the exactly the same concepts in the same order, but try to remove some of the equations
or something like that. And that's not always the right way to reach a different kind of audience.
I've come across this, of course, in my recent attempts to write the biggest ideas in the universe
where I'm trying to reach a broad audience with equations, but without any prior exposure to
those equations or those ideas. It's even harder if you're trying to explain without any equations
at all. It's really weird when you just take the usual steps that you would go through in an
undergraduate physics education and demathify them and expect people to understand. Another
failure mode is that sometimes we do search for analogies, stories, metaphors, allegories,
pictures, ways of getting across the basic idea without going into the equations. And it's a
little bit easy to forget that people take these analogies seriously, maybe more seriously than
they should, right? When a physicist presents an analogy for a deep physical concept, they know
which aspects of the analogy actually apply and which do not apply to this situation,
and the poor person listening doesn't know that. So they just take the analogy at face value.
So because of these failure modes, there's an enormous value to be placed on actually stepping
back, thinking deeply about the ideas we want to convey, forgetting about how we teach our
undergraduates, to really think about how we should just talk to people who are not going to become
physicists down the line, but want to understand the ideas. And today's guest, Matt Strassler,
is really, really good at exactly that. Matt is an accomplished physicist, someone I've known for a
long time, but he's put an enormous amount of work. I can vouch for this. I've been talking to
Matt for years about this book that is about to come out called Waves in an Impossible Sea,
How Everyday Life Emerges from the Cosmic Ocean. And the cheap way of saying what the book is about
is it's about quantum field theory and modern physics. But the real charm of the book is that
he really takes seriously the challenge of talking about these ideas in a way that is
as honest and true to the material as possible without just watering down the usual years-long
physics curriculum or relying on analogies that give you some good ideas and some bad ideas at
the same time. So it's a novel take on trying to understand these ideas. And we're going to go from
basic ideas like relativity and quantum field theory to maybe some fun research level things,
because Matt's a very good explainer of these things. So it's physics. It's the kind of stuff
we talk about all the time, but maybe with a slightly fresh take on it. So let's go.
Matt Straster, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast.
Thank you, Sean. It's a pleasure to be here.
So you know, like I do, that a bit over a decade ago we discovered The Higgs Boson,
and I wrote a whole book about The Higgs Boson. I remember this famous story, and apparently there
was a competition, you know, it was inspired by some British government official who didn't
understand The Higgs Boson. And so the physicist said, you know, who'd come up with the best
metaphor for what it is? And they came up with this metaphor of people of different levels of fame
walking through a party. I would start by asking you, like, what was that metaphor? Is it any good,
or does it do more harm than good? Well, the image that was brought to mind
by the winner of this competition has some, you know, it has some general merit to it,
and that it gives a sense of perhaps what things might be like in that a person who is totally
unknown can just make their way through the party. Nobody pays any attention. They just have to
shove their way through. The people are in their way, and that's all there is to it.
So that would be your experience in mind. But if Margaret Thatcher walks into the room,
suddenly everybody wants to talk to her, and so she makes it in a meter or so, and then she finds
herself stopped, and then she tries to go another few meters, and she stopped again. And so it just
takes her a very long time. She's slowed down by all the people in the room. And so the image that
this particular metaphor is trying to convey is that the Higgs field is like this substance
that fills the room, and those things that interact with that substance are slowed down,
and that has to do with why they have mass. And is that good?
Well, no. It's pretty bad, actually. And again, this is not to criticize the inventors
of this metaphor, because they were supposed to come up with something that fits in a paragraph.
And the fact of the matter is that some aspects of the universe don't fit in a paragraph,
and this is one of them. But what's unfortunate about this particular metaphor is not merely
that it doesn't really capture the essence of what's going on, but it actually flies in the face
of an even more important principle of nature. And that is the relationship between
mass and motion. And if, as this metaphor suggests, you get the idea that, oh, mass has to do with
slowing things down, with obstruction, with obstructing motion, then your conception of
the world ends up back in the Middle Ages. And you really don't want to end up there.
I mean, they were smart people, but they were very confused, and we would prefer to avoid
that confusion. Now, what am I talking about here? What is going wrong with this metaphor
is that it contradicts the principle of relativity, which if you even don't know much physics,
you've never taken a class on it, you've never heard much about it, violating the principle
of relativity sounds like a pretty bad idea, and it is. And the reason it's such an important
principle is that it explains many of the fundamentally counterintuitive aspects of the
basics of being in this world. For example, why it is that we're all, you know, I'm sitting down,
you're sitting down, both of us feel like we're not going anywhere. But of course, we are. The
earth is spinning, the earth is going around the sun, the sun is going around the galaxy,
and the speeds involved are enormous. I mean, the earth is going, the earth and sun are going
around the galaxy at 150 miles per second. Now, why don't we feel that? And why if the earth has
so much mass and this metaphor we're right, why isn't it slowing down? This picture of Margaret
Thatcher having a lot of mass because she's being slowed down by the crowd. Well, I mean,
the earth has a lot more mass than she does. Why isn't the Higgs field slowing the earth down?
Well, the answer is that the metaphor doesn't work. And you therefore have to try to find a way
back to the principle of relativity to start the process of explaining what the Higgs field
really does. And so that's why the book I've recently written starts at that place.
I do like the fact that you can date the origin of the metaphor so precisely just by the fact that
it was Margaret Thatcher who they picked as the famous person who would have trouble walking
through the party. Yes. And you can imagine that today it would be Elon Musk, but
he would certainly have trouble. But he's very wealthy, but his mass is not that big.
Well, this is what I like about your book because, of course, quantum field theory is a mutual
interest of ours. And I think that we both agree that it would be nice if everyone in the world
understood quantum field theory a little bit better than they do. If I were to explain it,
I would probably start with quantum mechanics and then say, OK, what if you do fields to it?
And you take a very different approach, really starting with relativity and spacetime and mass
and how those things work. So tell us what relativity is. It didn't come from Einstein originally.
It did not. And indeed, Einstein, in a way, saved it more than created it as we understand it today.
And the person who was perhaps most responsible, although clearly there were other people who were
thinking about it, historically was Galileo. In the 1630s, Galileo wrote a famous passage into one
of his texts in which he explained that if you're on a boat and you're inside the boat,
so the wind isn't blowing in your hair, you're just inside in one of the rooms,
and the boat is moving really steadily. It's not a wavy day. The boat is just smoothly moving
through the water. You will have no idea that the boat is in motion. You will not be able to tell
how fast it's going or which direction it's going. And he gives lots of examples of things
that you could do to try to check it. You might think that, well, if I drop something and the
boat is moving, then as I drop it, it will move towards the back of the boat. But that's not true.
Maybe you might think the flies in the room will be all pushed to the back of the room.
But that's not true. And when you think it through, he argued, you realize that there's
nothing, absolutely nothing you can do, which would show that you are in motion as long as that
motion is steady. And he infers from this that the laws of nature do not depend in any way on
whether you are moving if that motion is steady. And when you think about it, that's the thin end
of the wedge on the question of why you and I don't feel our motion. And so we go from
a situation where even in 1600, 50 years after Copernicus, really great thinkers like Tycho Brahe,
Kepler's boss, could write things down saying that it's just not possible that the earth is spinning
and moving around the sun. That makes no sense. We would feel it. A heavy body like the earth
shouldn't be moving. To the modern day where we realize that the earth, in fact, is flying
through the heavens at extraordinary speed and doing all sorts of gyrations, and yet we are
completely unaware of it here on earth. And the explanation for that is Galileo's realization
about how motion is a relative thing. There is no such thing as absolute motion. You can't say
in this universe whether you are moving or not. You can only say how fast you're moving relative
to another object. You and I had a longer than it should have been conversation once about whether
the earth goes around the sun. Or the sun around the earth. Well, or is it up to you because you
can choose coordinate systems? Did you ever personally come down to the right answer in your
mind there? I did. And this is a wonderful question, although it's a question fundamentally about
Einstein's general notion of relativity. I know, skipping ahead, but that's okay. It's just a
podcast. It's all right. But I'll give you the short answer. And of course, I wrote about this
extensively on my blog because I thought, this is such an interesting question. And here there are
professors at significant universities who actually argue that, no, you really can't say whether the
earth goes around the sun or vice versa. And the reason that's a mistake, I believe, is that
it's not just about two objects, one orbiting the other. You really are asking the question,
is the earth orbiting the sun subject to gravity? In other words, it's not just a matter about what
its path is, but why its path is the way it is. And you can easily tell that the earth is going
around the sun in sun's gravity and not the other way around as simply as looking, but by simply
looking at Kepler's third law of mechanics, which tells you that the planets have a rule by which
their orbital times are related to their orbital distances from the sun. And the earth satisfies
Kepler's law for the sun, whereas the earth also has a Kepler's like law. The moon satisfies it,
the space station satisfies it, but the sun does not. And so, in a way, it's as simple as that.
Now, you can go into more detail and talk about the fact that orbits are an entire class of motions
and not just the earth's motion alone, and come up with all sorts of ways of saying this in more
technical detail. But in the end, fundamentally, it's not true that the sun goes around the earth
gravitationally. And that's really what's at stake here. The earth goes around the sun
gravitationally and not the other way around. Yeah. And so, I am one of the people who would
disagree with you about this. But of course, it's interesting precisely because you and I
100% agree on the physics, right? It's just a matter of how to match up the words in the
English language to the physics that we understand. And that's going to be a theme throughout your
book and your attempts to discuss relativity and quantum mechanics and so forth. Yeah. I mean,
I think just in the sense there's an even larger issue, which is the fact that scientists could
agree on the physics and disagree on the way to talk about the physics, even colleagues like you
and you and I, is a clear problem for a person who is not an expert trying to understand what
scientists do know and what scientists are still disagreeing about. And so, I think,
for both you and I and for other people who spend a lot of time trying to convey
how science works, the important thing to do is be very clear about what it is we know
and about why it is we are explaining it in the way that we are, so that a non-expert could
read what I write about it and could read what you write about it and come away with a correct
impression, namely, we're not disagreeing about the math. We're disagreeing about the way to look
at the math, but that's not in the end what physics is. Physics is about prediction based
on mathematics and the fact that you want to talk about it in a different way does not make it a
contradiction. It simply makes it a different perspective on the same thing. Good. We'll see
how that shows up as we go, but I don't want to leave Galileo behind entirely because I've made
the case most clearly in my book, The Big Picture. To me, the specific idea that motion just continues
on by itself, right, that the natural state of things is for things to keep moving at a constant
velocity. If you want to promote that to conservation of momentum or something like that, you can,
but to me, that is maybe the single biggest realization in the history of science because
it removes the need for explaining why things are moving, right? In the middle ages point of view,
it was weird when things were moving and you needed a force or a mover to do it and post Galileo
and his other predecessors, like Ibn Sina, who set this up, now we can just think of the universe
as kind of a mechanism following patterns. That's right. And there's a very close tie between
the law of inertia or whatever, what comes up in physics classes as Newton's first law of motion,
although he wasn't the first person to write it down by any means, and Galileo's principle,
that these two are in some sense two sides of the same coin because what Galileo says is you
can't tell the difference between steady motion and no motion. And so if you believe that if you
are stationary, you will remain stationary unless something does something to you,
then it must also be true that if you're in steady motion, you will remain in steady motion
until somebody does something to you. So they are very closely tied together, these notions.
Did either Galileo or Newton say those words that you just said, make that argument?
That's a great question. I don't know the history enough to know of a precise point at which either
one might have said that. It's something I should maybe look into. It's an interesting question.
Of course, the way we learn history is we learn the history of the great thinkers,
but there are always smaller personalities who have certain insights and write certain things
down. And so to trace that back and find out which one or which set of people first have
these insights would be a real challenge even for a historian of science since we're talking
several hundred years ago. But it's probably known to the experts in that field.
So we're already coming up across something even at this pretty easy to understand level of what
Galileo was talking about, but something that's nevertheless pretty non-intuitive. The idea that
there is no universal standard of rest. There is no way to just say, here is the speed of something
full stop. This is going to be something we got to continue to fight against all the way up through
modern physics, right? Absolutely. It's a fascinating thing that we teach physics to
college students. And this is almost the first thing we teach them. And in the classes where I
was taught and in the classes where I've been expected to teach, the idea is you teach Newton's
first law maybe in the first week or maybe in the second week, and then you move on without
grappling with the fact that this is a remarkably counterintuitive notion. We never
see this, experience this in ordinary life. Anything that we want to move, we typically
have to keep it moving. Cars need engines, planes need engines. We have to keep pushing,
walking tires us out. We can't just sort of glide down a highway without doing anything.
And that's because friction and other forms of drag are ubiquitous on the earth.
And so we grow up in an environment and we have an intuition that motion requires
activity. But it's only by understanding that motion does not require activity that we can
understand astronomy, that we can understand why the earth does what it does and the moon does what
it does. And so again, this is why astronomy was so counterintuitive. It took so many
hundreds, thousands of years to understand. So yes, this is a profoundly counterintuitive notion
and we don't fundamentally know why it should be true, why it has to be true. We just have
experimental evidence that makes it seem that it appears that it's true throughout the universe.
And yet, and this is in some sense where we get into the really interesting aspects of modern
physics, it almost broke down. It was on the verge of breaking down when people tried to understand
what light is. And we're going to get to that. Okay, good. Yeah, no, that's, it's always a back
and forth, right? Like one generation's precious principle that we can't violate is another one's
antiquated relic that we have to overcome. Absolutely. And speaking of which, a topic
that you go into great detail in the book, you've mentioned Newton's first law, then there's,
which says that we're going to go in straight lines if you don't act on us with a force,
but the second law, that's where Newton really made his money, right? That's f equals ma, that's
what made modern physics possible. And there's all three of those symbols, f and m and a,
are kind of interesting. But let's talk about m. What is that parameter that appears in Newton's
law? Was he the first to talk about that? Where did it come from? Well, in a way, it has a long
complex history like most concepts, but the original confusion about what we now call mass
is it's a conflation with the concept of weight. Yeah. And before Newton, people assumed these
two concepts were essentially the same, as far as I understand. And Newton was the first to
realize no, you have to separate them. And to talk about it in modern language, rather than try to
confuse ourselves with the way people used to think about it. Mass is a property that tells
you how hard it is to change an object's motion. Now, again, this is in contrast to that Higgs
metaphor and Margaret Thatcher that we started with, which suggests that mass is about how quickly
things slow down. It's quite the reverse. Things will continue in a straight line unless you do
something to them. And mass is how hard it is to change something's direction or slow something
down or speed it up. And so that is a that is a an aspect of an object which reflects
not its motion, but it's in some sense, it's stubbornness that prevents change in motion.
Now, what is weight? Weight is how heavy an object is literally how hard it is to hold an
object up against the pull of gravity. And on earth, these two things are completely connected
to each other. The more mass an object has, the more weight it has. But and so it was natural for
people living on earth and never having gone anywhere else and never really having thought
that hard about any place else to imagine these with the same thing. But Newton's key recognition
was this couldn't be true. If there was some way to understand the moon's motion in terms of gravity
or the planets in terms of gravity, it had to be that weight for something that's far enough away
would be smaller, even though its mass remained the same. So the moon has an enormous mass,
but its weight, that is to say, it's the degree to which it is pulled by the earth's gravity
is much smaller than you would imagine if you thought mass and weight were the same thing.
So and you know, we carry this conflation of mass and weight with us wherever we go.
That's why we're always interested in, you know, watching our weight and keeping our weight under
control. Whereas in fact, if you just wanted to lose weight, you could go to the moon. But I don't
think your body shape would change at all. So one should keep in mind that one really wants to lose
his mass. And I'm kind of surprised that physics teachers don't sort of teach this right at the
beginning of the section on gravity. But it seems an obvious point to make that we conflate these
two ideas. But to understand modern physics, even to understand Newtonian physics, you have to first
pull these ideas apart. And what's interesting about that is that you need to bring in gravity
into the discussion. And I think that, you know, from the Ask Me Anything questions I get for the
podcast, etc. I think that this is a very natural confusion that people have, like is mass somehow
intrinsically linked to the idea of gravity, or is it something separate? And the answer is implicit
in what you said, but let's make it explicit. Well, it's even, it is, but it's a little subtle too,
which is that when we get to Einstein, we're even going to have to keep track of the fact that what
you mean by mass is ambiguous if you're not careful. But at the time of Newton, the idea was that
mass has to do with motion, as we just described, has to do with preventing changes or getting in
the way of changes of motion. But it also, for some reason that Newton did not understand,
has to do with gravity in that the force between two objects involves the multiplying their two
masses together. And the more mass things have, the more gravity they inflict on other things.
What we know today is that the chain of logic, linking those different types of,
those different aspects of mass is more complicated. And that in fact, gravity comes from energy and
momentum, and not directly from what we would call rest mass, which is the type of mass that I've,
that affects motion in the simplest sense. And also, most importantly, it's the type of mass
called rest mass is what appears in Einstein's most famous formula, E equals mc squared, interpreted
as saying that the mass of an object that's at rest, that's stationary, has to do with the amount
of energy that's inside it. So what Einstein does, he says, well, look, mass, at least rest mass,
the mass of a stationary object comes from its energy. And separately, gravity is an effect
that comes from energy. So when you put those two things together in simple situations, you get
Newton's notion that gravity comes from mass, because gravity comes from energy and mass is a
form of energy. But when you pull them apart, you get the much more varied and much richer
notion of what gravity can do that you know better than I in the context of general relativity and
Einstein's theory of gravity. And speaking of, you know, Einstein's theory of gravity, he was
led to his insights in part because of the principle of equivalence, which people give
credit to Einstein for. But Newton noticed a version of the principle of equivalence, right?
Sure. In the sense that all objects already just from the start, all objects fall to the
earth at the same rate in a way, even Galileo knew this, and Newton in a way gave it an explanation.
Because he noted that the acceleration of an object is related to the force on it divided
by its mass. And in gravity, the force on it is proportional to its mass. And so in the acceleration,
the mass cancels out. There's a mass in the numerator, there's a mass in the denominator,
and so acceleration is the same for all objects falling on the earth. And so that means that if
I take a little paperclip and I take a heavy book and I drop them at the same time, they land at
the same time. And if you haven't ever seen this yourself, try it. It's amazing how many people
sort of know this, but have never actually tried to drop something really light and something really
heavy, making sure that that very light thing isn't affected by air resistance. And in that case,
you'll really see it's as though it looks like magic. And it is in a way a sort of magic because
it's what leads to Einstein's conception that gravity could be an aspect of the geometry of space
and time rather than some just generalized force. It has some very special properties.
Well, I think that's why Newton maybe didn't explain it as completely as Einstein did, right?
I mean, yes, Newton noticed that the parameter mass that appears in his second law and the
parameter mass that appears in the law of gravity are the same parameter. But why are they the same
parameter? It was a little bit unclear and that was kind of mysterious. I'm not sure that Einstein
does completely explain it. He accounts for it. It is a true fact in general relativity,
but if someone just sat back and said, did it have to be that way? I'm not even sure what the
right answer is. Well, that's a really good question because in a way, there is an explanation
that comes out of quantum field theory if you accept that gravity comes from a gravitational
field that is associated with what a particle physicist would call a particle of spin 2.
And what's interesting about that is in Einstein's theory, yes, there is an association of
gravity with a field with certain properties such that its particles have spin 2 and then
it does follow from mathematical consistency that you must be able to interpret space and time
in terms of interpret gravity in terms of the geometry of space and time.
But one thing that's often forgotten, although I'm again, people like you know this very well,
is that there was a competing theory of gravity at that time by a fellow named Nordstrom.
And in Nordstrom's theory, instead of spin 2, there was a spin zero object and it was a perfectly
good theory. But in retrospect, the mathematics would not have required it to have the properties
that Einstein wanted it to have. Whereas with the spin 2 field, you are sort of forced into it by
the math. That's not something Einstein knew at the time. That was something that was learned later.
So in a way, Einstein got lucky. He had some principles. They led to a particular theory.
It turns out that there weren't many options beyond the one he came up with that would be
mathematically consistent. But at the time, you know, like any good theorist, he had some
principles he was working with and it led him to an answer. But it wasn't obvious that it was
the correct answer. That depended on experiment. I think that the idea of thinking of gravity
is arising from a spin 2 particle is a really fun and important one. And we should talk about it
again. But we have to eat our vegetables a little bit first and work our way up. So let's just remind
ourselves what happened to the poor principle of relativity. I mean, Galileo put it out there.
Newton had a theory that embodied it. But then something happened with electricity and
magnetism and the world was never the same. Yes. In a way, we could certainly talk about
electricity and magnetism in their details. But in a way, the problem is even deeper,
which is the simple observation that light somehow makes it across the universe.
Light can travel a very long distance, and it doesn't lose its oomph. It clearly maintains its
color, its frequency as it goes. Somehow, you know, it has this property that somehow it can
travel through the universe itself. And if you think light is just a bunch of particles, as Newton
did, that might not be so surprising. If that if the universe is mostly empty, and you're sending
bullets through it, well, the bullets will just keep going according to Newton's first law,
nothing there to stop them or slow them down. But there was a debate for two centuries as to
whether light was a wave or made of particles. And then around 1800, there was definitive evidence
from interference effects that no, light is really a wave. And now we hit a puzzle,
a very serious puzzle. Because, you know, sound waves are waves in air, they don't go through
the universe. Why not? Because there's no air there. A sound wave is a vibration of the air.
If there's no air, there's no sound waves. Same idea if you go to the beach, right,
the ocean waves come to the beach, and they stop, they don't keep going because there's no war.
So if light waves can go through the universe, there must be something out there. There must
be a thing that you would naturally think that is vibrating that in which the waves are a vibration.
So what is this thing? And why doesn't it slow the earth down?
So we hit a puzzle. Don't keep us hanging here, Matt. Tell us what the answer is.
Well, I mean, at a certain level, we don't entirely know the answer. What Einstein did was
point out that, well, let me back up one step. The point that seems obvious is even if you're
confused about what this stuff is, you should be able to measure whether you're moving through it or
not. For example, if you're in a boat, you can easily tell if you're moving through the water
or not. If you turn off your engine, if you're moving through the water, you will very quickly
slow down. And although Galileo says you can't measure whether you're moving in a steady motion,
if you're slowing down, you certainly feel that. So same thing for a plane that's flying through
the air. If it were stationary, it would be doing one thing. And if it's flying through the air without
an engine, it's going to slow down and so forth. So you can tell whether you are in motion and
how you are in motion with respect to ordinary substances. So the basic idea was we ought to
be able to tell if we're moving through this magical substance, which was called the luminiferous
ether name, which has got lovely resonances to it. It's a great name compared to a lot of other
dumb names physicists came up with. It's such a shame. It's too bad it doesn't exist. I know.
Or maybe it is. We'll come back to that. But in any case, the idea was, all right,
there should be some measurement we can make that can tell us something about this substance
in which light is a wave. And in the 1880s, the right technology came along. And that was invented
by Albert Michelson, who along with Edmund Morley, built a machine, a device, that could very
accurately measure the speed of light in different directions. And if you think about it, if you're
moving through the water and you're looking at ocean waves, ocean waves that are going in the
same direction that you're going will seem relative to your boat to move more slowly than ocean waves
going the other direction. And so it was a similar idea that Michelson had in mind that you should
be able to tell that light moves at different speeds relative to this medium, depending on how
fast the earth is going through the medium. And of course, the earth goes in different directions
every, you know, as it goes around the sun. So if you measure this a few times a year, you measure
this in different directions, you should be able to tell a difference. And famously, Michelson and
Morley saw no difference at all. Speed of light seemed to be the same from all directions at all
times. And that seems to be in contradiction with the idea that there's a substance in which light
is a wave. Now, this is where we come back to Galileo, because if it had been true that Michelson's
experiment had worked, if it were possible to tell how fast the earth were moving through this
luminiferous ether, then it would not be true that all types of steady motion are the same.
There would be experiments that you could do even in a closed room, even under the deck of a ship,
as Galileo suggested, there would be experiments you could do. You could do Michelson's experiment
and tell how fast you are moving through the ether. But since the ether apparently is everywhere in
space after where, after all, light goes through the universe from all directions and from many
places, then you would conclude that Galileo's idea, although it might apply to some things,
is not fundamentally correct. And so Michelson's experiment, had it shown a difference in the
speeds of light from different directions, would have been the death knell for Galileo's
relativity. So now came a brief period of 25 years where people tried to explain what does
Michelson's experiment mean? Why can't we detect this thing? And there were various ideas which
we don't have to go into, but all of them would still have violated Galileo's relativity.
And then Einstein pointed out, as a 26-year-old student, that actually if you insist that Galileo's
relativity is correct, and you relinquish your notions of space and time as you always thought
they worked, you can write down math that can both explain why light travels as a wave,
particular a wave of the electromagnetic fields, and yet can travel from your perspective at the
same speed from all directions independently of how you are moving or the object that's
emitting the light is moving. And that was an extraordinary thing to point out. That's obviously
one of the great ideas in scientific history, because it showed that the only way to reconcile
light's amazing ability to travel the universe is to give up your notions of how space and time work.
It seems like a big ask, but it paid off.
It's a huge ask, and needless to say, people were curious, interested, but very skeptical.
But in the end, it doesn't matter what people think. It matters what experiment says.
Experiments said these ideas are correct.
You make the case very nicely that Einstein's insight here really wasn't the word
relativity in any sense at all. Relativity was already there, and then there was this
experimental idea that the speed of light was constant to everyone. He figured out how to
reconcile those two amazing facts that sound innocuous together, but have tension between them.
Yeah, that's right. Einstein's theory of relativity is not the invention of the idea of
relativity. It is a revision of the idea of relativity as Galileo had it, because Galileo
didn't worry about time. Galileo just worried about how things move, but he assumed time is just
time. And Einstein is now already, even before general relativity, starting to make us wonder
how we should think about time and what it means if everybody who's moving around has a different
clock than the notion of simultaneity and the notion of synchronized clocks. It's all starting
to come at risk. And general relativity tears it all apart.
Well, I got a question recently. Why don't people consider special relativity as one of the great
triumphs of unification of physics, because it unified space and time together? And my result,
my answer was, like, what do you mean? I always talk about it that way. That's exactly what it was.
And many other unifications came with it. This is where we can now finally talk about
E equals mc squared and how mass and energy are related to each other.
Even in some sense, the unification of electricity and magnetism, which I think fairly can be
attributed to Maxwell, there is a way in which that unification becomes not only true but necessary
once you have Einstein's understanding of how it works. You simply can't talk about one without
the other, because what is electric from one person's point of view can be part electric,
part magnetic from another person's point of view. And that's deeply integrated into the
math of the theory. And we're left with a picture where, I mean, eventually Einstein
events general relativity, we don't need to go into great details about that. But it leaves
us hanging a little bit with this issue of whether space or space time, if you want,
is a medium by itself, right? It's not the ether, we can't measure our velocity with respect to it,
but it's something, it has a geometry, et cetera. How are we supposed to think about space and
space time? Well, I think that remains one of the great questions of modern physics today,
in the sense that as you just to say what you said, but in a slightly different way,
there is a fundamental tension that still remains conceptually. It's not a tension in
the mathematics, but it's tension in how we think about it, in that we know today that,
thanks to Einstein, that space and time somehow thought of together, they're kind of like a
fabric in that they can stretch in the expanding universe, that's what's happening, they can warp,
that's what gives us gravity, they can ripple, that's what gives us gravitational waves,
which are the subject of a Nobel Prize just in the last few years. And yet,
this fact that we can't measure this substance, whatever it is, we can't measure whether we're
moving through it or not, because that would violate Galileo's principle. So to say it again,
space is sort of a thing, it does stuff, but we are not able to measure whether we are moving
through it. And more generally, we're not able to measure its presence, or we can see some of the
things it does, and yet we can't see kind of what it is, we can't grab hold of it or bottle it,
it's not like a substance the way water is a substance, or like any other substance we're
used to. And so this conflict between a substance-like thing, which acts like it's there, and this
thing which sometimes acts like it's nothingness, that fundamental conflict is a deep conceptual
conflict for our brains, the math is okay with it, but it's such a deep problem that it might even
make you wonder whether space is real. Good. Go ahead. And so, and physicists do really wonder
about this. I mean, this is an active area of research, there are various reasons for that,
which are kind of another discussion. But certainly, we live in a universe whose basic
fundamental properties are very strange. Strange enough that we should certainly worry
that maybe there's another level of understanding behind them that we have yet to encounter.
I'm really glad that you put it that way, because it's very honest. You weren't trying to claim more
certainty than we have, which some people will sometimes try to do. And also, I personally,
at the research level, am increasingly sympathetic to notions where
this lack of a rest frame, what we call Lorentz invariance in the technical lingo,
is only an approximation. That in fact, it comes out in the wash at long wavelengths, low energies,
things like that, like many other things do, but maybe it's actually not a fundamental feature
of the universe. I'm not wedded to that idea, but I think it's absolutely on the table as a
possibility and a very exciting one, both theoretically and experimentally.
I've written this book as though we're sure about Galileo's principle of relativity. But of
course, there are no principles about which we are sure. They're always subject to experimental
verification at more and more precise levels as our technology improves. And it's always possible
that something we have held as almost certainly true for hundreds of years may fall apart at some
point, just as Newton's law of gravity did after more than 200 years. So we have to be humble about
what we do and don't understand. But there is also the possibility that even the notion of space
is an approximation to something far stranger. And those people who think about quantum of gravity
along certain modern lines face that because we have found equations that not necessarily the
equations that describe our universe, but we have found equations in which space is an epiphenomenon,
an emergent concept. And the basic thing you start with is just a very large collection of
objects that don't have any notion of space at all. So we know there's a lot we don't know,
and any particular way of looking at the world that we have now has to be viewed as a
progress report, a very successful progress report at the moment, but one which has plenty of holes
in it that could turn out to be quite large in the end. Good. But this question of the realness
of space, the thinginess of space, I don't know if you know, do you know about the Clark Leibniz
correspondence? Have you heard these words before? Yes. You and I have spoken about this,
and I recall it. Clark, you read about that in my book because you are a reader. Leibniz and
Newton arguing for Clark, yes. Is space relational or a substantive title? Is it a thing or is it
just a collection of relations? And we still don't know. Like in Einstein's world, it was a substance,
but maybe we're post-Einstein now. But another fact to keep in the back of our minds when we're
contemplating that question is that space isn't really empty or it's not featureless anyway,
because it's filled with all of these fields like the electromagnetic field. So you do a great
job in your book talking about what a field is, the idea of the fundamentality of fields,
which is very bizarre to people. They always want to know what the fields are made of,
and I gotta say, no, no, no. The things are made of fields, not the other way around.
Part of the problem with talking about fields and what they are is that fundamentally we don't
know. It's always harder to explain something you don't really understand. We understand what
fields do with remarkable precision in many cases. We have math that describes what they
will do in all sorts of circumstances we can predict, all sorts of wonderful details,
but just because you can predict what something does doesn't mean you really understand fundamentally
what it is. An analogy I like to use that I think is reflective of the right way to think about
fields is that if you think about the atmosphere, just think about the air of the earth. It has all
sorts of features that you can measure. It has pressure, it has temperature, it has wind, wind
meaning how fast it's flowing in a particular location, and these things, pressure, temperature,
wind, humidity, these are properties of the air that you can measure anywhere. There's some machine
you can use for measuring the wind speed and direction, etc. But imagine that you didn't
know what air was, and all you had was these measuring devices. You could measure this thing
which you call pressure, but you don't have the conception that it is literally the pressure of
a gas. You just call it P, and you measure this thing called T, it's temperature, but you don't
know that, and something called W which is wind, but you don't know that. You have these things
you can measure, and you can figure out equations which describe how they work,
and you can even predict the weather if you're clever enough to figure out the right equations,
because the equations stand on their own. They tell you how these things you can measure change
over time and how they relate to each other, but if you don't know what air is, or even
necessarily that it exists, then you don't know what pressure, how to think about pressure. You
don't know what property of air it's referring to, and since you don't even know what air is,
you can't even sort of talk about what property it might be. And this may be our situation with
the fields of the universe, where the vast majority of the fields, with one interesting
exception that I'll come back to, they seem to be properties of the universe the way pressure
is a property of air. That might be the right way to think about them, but we have no idea which
properties, and we have no idea what the substance of the universe is, and the one interesting
exception is gravity, which is ironic, because in many ways gravity is the one we understand the
least from the point of view of quantum physics, but in the case of gravity, the gravitational field
is telling you about the property of space, which we call curvature, the degree to which it's worked.
So it is possible that the electromagnetic field is telling us some property of space and time
that is not obvious, some sort of hidden property that we have yet to learn. In string theory,
for example, that's a common situation, not to say anything pro or con against string theory,
but it is an example of a context in which the luminiferous ether does exist, it's a part of
spacetime, and so it may be that this notion that space and time are a substance that has many
properties and those properties are the fields of nature, that may be a perspective which
is at least useful and maybe even somewhat fundamental, but we still have to deal with
the fact that space is very strange because you can't measure your motion with respect to it,
so if it's like a material, it's not like anything we've ever seen.
I just want to be sure, because the audience has different levels of understanding here,
if we put aside for the moment our desires to be super duper careful and clear and correct,
what is a field?
A field is something that is found, well, let me back up one step. A cosmic field,
the field of the cosmos, is something that can be measured anywhere in the universe.
It's some sort of property which has the feature that if you change it in one place,
it has effects in other places in the future. In some sense, that's the most important
aspect of what a field is. It's something which is everywhere, and it's not just
randomly everywhere, it has this feature that it's somehow what you do at point A
affects later what happens at point B and vice versa. So in the context of air as an analogy,
the fields of air are found everywhere in the air, and if you change the wind in one place,
it's going to cause the wind to change somewhere else, and in fact, that's what weather prediction
is all about. It's about saying, okay, I know what the fields of air are today. I know what the
pressure and the temperature and the wind are right now. Can I predict in the future what they
will be? And the fact that the future depends in such detail on the past, and not just on the past
at my current location, but on the past at all locations nearby, and the further back in time
I go for my predictions, the more of these fields I need to know and further, further distances,
this is what's characteristic of a field. So if you think about weather prediction
and about the properties of the air and how they affect each other, and now you extend that to
properties of the universe, now you're thinking about fields, I think, in a sensible way.
Okay, that's very good. And if we were to add quantum mechanics to the mix, there's this wonderful
fact that, and we don't need to talk about many worlds or measurement problem, that's okay,
that's a different podcast, but we should talk about the fact that when you quantize a field,
when you take fields and put them into your quantum mechanical brain, out pop particles.
I don't know if you want to just take that for granted right now, or do you have a favorite
way of thinking about that remarkable fact? Well, I think it's useful maybe to step back a moment.
Obviously, the purpose of, I should say something about the reason why the book that I've just
written is called Waves in an Impossible Sea. We've just been talking about the sea, that's the
universe, and we've been talking about why it's impossible because it has these very strange
features that it both seems to be there and seems not to be there, depending on what question you
ask. But then there are the waves, and the reason to talk about waves is that fundamentally,
the things we call elementary particles, electrons, quarks, photons, they are
in the language of quantum field theory more wave-like than particle-like. And
to understand what that means requires dealing with the fact that there's a history
to the notion that electrons are both particles and waves. That's a trope that comes out of the
1920s and 30s, but it's one that got modified over the decades and in ways that aren't always
made explicit. It's a mess. And the word particle and the word field are again misleading in how
we use them compared to how they're used in daily English. And so one has to really take a moment
to just parcel that. So with that preamble, let me please start. So when we talk about particle
in ordinary English, we always mean something like a grain of sand or a dust particle. Something
that's like a little ball, maybe irregular shaped, but it's this little thing that moves
around on some path. And when people first discovered electrons, that's what they thought
they were. So they called them particles. And when it turned out that's not what they were,
they still called them particles. So we often face this problem in science and science communication
that things are named before they are understood. And very rarely are they renamed
once it becomes clear what's actually going on. Very true. That's a problem. So there's that
problem. We have to first take the word particle and understand that we're not going to use it the
way our English conception of particle is used in ordinary language. And then wave is a problem too.
When we say light is a wave, we do not mean that light is like a wave breaking at the beach.
At the beach, we mean here comes a big wave. What we mean is here is a high point in the water
separated from the next high point by a low point behind it and a low point in front of it.
Whereas when we talk about sound waves coming from a musical instrument or from somebody's voice,
or we talk about light waves coming from a light bulb, we're talking about a long sequence of high
and low points, a long sequence of wave crests and wave troughs, which we often call in ordinary
English, if we were at the beach, we would call it a wave set or a series of waves. So what we mean
by wave singular in physics may have many crests and troughs, which is not the way we would talk
about things at the beach. So that's important because when we say light is made from particles,
don't want you to think about the individual particles as being individual crests in a
wave train. That's the wrong picture. Okay, I won't. So now how do we understand that we are made
from waves? This is a very strange thing. Again, it's such a strange thing that it took people
a long time to make sense of it because we from ordinary life have a lot of intuition about waves
and we have all seen houses made of bricks and made from stones and made from concrete,
but you have never seen a house made from sound waves, you've never seen a house made from earthquake
waves. Waves are not things that we think of as objects from which you can make structured
objects that will stay together and stay organized for centuries. And so the idea that we and the
walls and the table and so forth are made from waves requires already some sort of conceptual
leap. And the conceptual leap is that, and again it's due to Einstein, although not in a single step,
is that even the waves of light, which are definitely waves in the sense that they are
there are crests and troughs, these things have a frequency and a wavelength just like
sound waves do, nevertheless, they are made from, well, we call them particles, let's not call them
particles, let's just say they're made from things, we'll call them photons, and now let's figure out
what they are. And so the way I like to talk about this that I think is useful is that we have many
examples of objects that we know are kind of granular or particulate, but not in the sense
that they're made from particles per se. So yes, if you go to a beach, it looks continuous, but if
you look closely, there's all sorts of sand grains that make it up. In that case, the objects are
really particles of sand. But if you take a giant pile of spaghetti, dried spaghetti before you cook
it, well, if you look at it from far enough away, it just looks like a giant pile, but if you go in
there and dig around, you realize there's lots of individual strands of spaghetti there, or if you
take a giant stack of paper, you've never seen one before, it may not be obvious to you whether
it's continuous or discrete, whether it's what it's made of, but if you start taking it apart,
you will very quickly realize it's made from sheets of paper. And so when we look at a laser beam,
it is not obvious to us that it isn't a continuous thing. And then in fact, it's made
from individual strands, in a sense. The way a rope is made from individual strands of twine,
it's not that it's made literally from particle-like objects, but it can be disassembled
into individual pieces. And those pieces of a light wave, again, they're not individual crests
and troughs. Each one of them is a series of crests and troughs. And we call those things photons.
So photons are waves, but they are particulate. They cannot be divided into smaller pieces.
And they are the things out of which more dramatic waves, like those in a laser beam,
are constructed. And this is far from obvious, just as it would not be obvious to a person
seeing a rope for the first time, that you could disassemble the rope into individual strands.
And that's why people before the 20th century didn't have,
it wasn't obvious to people before the 20th century that this was true. You needed the technology
and you also needed the right set of experiments to give you a clue that this is something that
might be the case. And this is a specifically quantum mechanical aspect of light. Maxwell's
equations did a perfectly good job of talking about light waves in a classical way. And this
photon language only becomes relevant once quantum mechanics comes on the scene.
In a way, you can say it's the definition of the first aspect of quantum physics.
The statement that light is made from photons is a more general statement that there are large
classes of waves in our universe, and in particular, all of the waves of the elementary
fields of the universe are made from these individual pieces, which are called, generally,
quanta. That's where the word quantum initially comes from historically,
is Einstein trying to suggest that light is made from these individual strands or packets,
or whatever you want to call them. And it was only 15 to 20 years later that people gave these
bits of light the name photon. And even five years after that, that they realized that there
was an analogy between photons and electrons, that electrons were not actually these dot-like
particles, the ones we draw in the cartoon of atoms, but they're more like photons. They have
wave-like properties. They are particulate waves rather than being particles in the English sense.
And so this is really the language of quantum field theory that comes out of the 1950s.
And it's different from the language of the quantum mechanics physicists of the 1920s and 30s,
whose famous statements such as an electron is both a wave and a particle, or sometimes it's a
wave, and sometimes it's a particle. That's a language which Niels Bohr popularized,
but it was left in historical dust as far as the math. And yet, it maintained a life of its own
in the culture. So most people who teach quantum physics still use this language
when they teach quantum mechanics to juniors in college. And it certainly has survived in most of
the popular science books. So that causes a lot of confusion. And that's one of the reasons why
in my book I spent a whole chapter trying to make this really clear, that we don't think about an
electron as a dot. And in fact, you can't understand its most critical properties, such as the fact
that it has mass, if you think of it as a dot. Because if it's really a dot, and it's really
true that E equals mc squared, and therefore the mass of the electron has something to do with the
energy that it carries with it, when it's stationary, well, why would a stationary dot have energy,
especially if it's really a point-like object in some sense? Where would that energy be?
But when you understand that an electron, even an electron that is stationary, is a wave-like
object, and like the wave on a guitar string, it is vibrating and is sitting in place. It's not
going anywhere. But nevertheless, there is vibration associated with it. Then you understand, ah,
there's energy associated with the vibration. And that's where the mass comes from. And if you
thought of an electron as a dot just sitting there, instead of thinking of it as a wave that's
vibrating, you have no way into this idea. And that's why it's so important that in quantum field
theory, we do not think about electrons as dots. And we do have an understanding of what their mass
is associated with. Not to mention the fact that, at least at face value, a dot-like electron would
collapse to be a black hole. Well, there is that problem too, but you know,
I think it's useful to understand that this particular problem is independent of gravity.
And would be there even in the absence of gravity. So while it's certainly true that point-like
objects without some sort of wave-like structure have all sorts of conceptual issues associated
with them, there's an independent sort of conceptual problem, which is that if you carry
this notion of a dot-like electron with you too far, even if you take Bohr seriously, that some
of the time it's like a particle and some of the time it's like a wave, you've lost the fact that
its wave-like property, the fact that it's a vibrating object, is essential in its existence.
And its basic properties, such as its mass, simply are not explicable if you somehow try
to make that point-like object work in your head. It doesn't work. And we see this in these
fundamental properties of electrons and all the other elementary particles too.
For the listeners who have followed us this far into the podcast, we're allowed to get a little
more technical and wild here. So I'm going to fearlessly ask you about the difference between
electron fields and photon fields. We have our fermions and our bosons, and they're fundamentally
different kinds of fields, and that contributes to why, conceptually, we tend to think of
matter and light as two different kinds of things.
Right. And of course, you and I have, well, the word matter is another one of those words that
is really problematic. So let's be a little clearer.
I'm just throwing it out just so because I know you'll get a rise out of here.
Yeah. You went there, the target was right on. But let's just talk about atoms and light.
And there is this, as you said, this remarkable feature of our world that is not to be taken
for granted. You have to work out in mathematics of quantum fields to show that there's only two
types of fields. Or rather, you can divide all of the fields that could possibly be part of our
cosmos into two classes. One of those classes is called bosonic fields. The other class is called
fermionic fields. The particles, that is to say, the waves that are the minimal waves that you
can have in the electromagnetic field that we call photons, they are bosons. Then there is an
electron field, not to be confused with the electric field. There is an electron field,
that is fermionic, and it's minimal waves of what we call electrons. And all of the different
elementary particles of nature can be understood. Each one is a wave of a particular field, and
each field has to be either bosonic or fermionic, and each particle has to either be a boson or
fermion. Now, what's the key difference? The key difference, we already learned some of it in
undergraduate chemistry. Electrons cannot do the same thing at the same time. No two electrons can
do identical things. This is known as the Pauli exclusion principle, and it was discovered as
people tried to understand the properties of atoms back in the 1920s. And the whole structure of atoms
would be completely different if electrons were bosons, because bosons don't have an exclusion
principle. In fact, they are perfectly happy to do exactly the same thing, and that's why lasers can
be made out of photons. So you couldn't make atoms like ours if electrons were bosons instead of
fermions, and you couldn't make lasers out of light if light was made from fermions. So these are
very obvious differences, but the degree to which they affect our macroscopic experience
is a little less obvious. And so one of the remarkable things is that if electrons were
bosons, not only would atomic structure be very different, but if you tried now to pile a large
number of atoms together, instead of forming crystals or blocky structures that you could make
tables and microphones and people out of, they would just sort of collapse in on themselves.
And so the very basics of the macroscopic world depend on the fact that electrons are fermions,
but they also depend on something else, because the powerly exclusion principle would not apply
if electrons weren't literally identical. And why are electrons literally identical? Well,
that is one of the key predictions of quantum field theory. If electrons were just dots,
we would have no idea why they are identical, but they are waves in a field, and it's the same field,
right? There's just one electron field, and the minimal wave in an electron field is an electron,
and it doesn't matter where you make it, it doesn't matter when you make it, it doesn't matter how
long it's been around for, it remains a minimal wave of the electron field, and so any two electrons
they're the same type of thing, they are literally identical, and because of that the
powerly exclusion principle can apply to them, and because of that our world can have macroscopic
objects in it that don't collapse. And it's really important and fascinating to me in the context
of quantum field theory that you have your electrons, you have your electromagnetic field,
but there's not an infinite variety of possible kinds of fields, right? There's a kind of a tiny
handful, and essentially almost all the ones that we think are possible are there between gravity
and Higgs, and electromagnetism, and other forest fields, and electrons and so forth. Like,
it's a really limited set to draw from. Well, this is an interesting feature of the
discoveries that physicists on the theoretical side and mathematical physicists have made about
how quantum field theory can work. When you go into a subject which has some mathematical content,
like physics, you could wonder whether the world that you see is just one example of
possible worlds, maybe there's an enormous number and you're living in just one for some reason,
or you can imagine maybe there's only one possible world that's consistent with quantum field theory,
or with quantum field theory and gravity together, and we live in it because there's
simply no other type of world that you could have. And the reality turns out to be somewhere
in between. It's remarkable how many mathematical constraints there are. When you try to combine
quantum physics and special relativity, that is, say, pre-gravity, and then when you try to combine
it with gravity as well, you find that the mathematics is somewhat rigid. You can't do
anything you want. You can only do a relatively limited set of things. It's still a very big set,
but it's a lot smaller than you might have thought. And on your point that there's a limited set of
types of fields, that's true with a caveat, which is that this assumes that the fields have
particles either whose mass is zero or their mass has come from a limited set of possibilities.
Once you allow for particles that get and get their mass any old way, you have a wider set
of possibilities. But experimentally, we find that all of the particles that we know of so far,
with one exception, their particles either don't have any mass like the photon, or if they do have
mass like the electron, they get it in a very special way. And that's from this strange substance
called the Higgs field that we started our discussion with. So it is true that once you know
experimentally that there are some limits to the types of fields we find in nature, then you find
that the possibilities are very limited indeed. And so it's some mix of theory and experiment
that tell us that we're in this strangely or maybe not strangely limited situation.
Well, let's close the circle here by getting the Higgs boson right, because I think that
as we discussed with people with the best of intentions, physicists try to explain things,
and they smooth over some rough edges, and they say the Higgs field is responsible for mass.
And I get very well intentioned members of the general public saying, well, mass creates gravity.
So without gravity, would there be no Higgs field or is the Higgs responsible for gravity or
something like that? Hopefully, everyone who's been following along with what you've said so far
knows why that's not right. But let's help them out a little bit. Well, indeed, it's a natural
confusion to have if you think that the Higgs field is responsible for mass. But that is not
correct. In fact, the Higgs field is not responsible for most of your mass. Because protons and
neutrons, which are the majority of the mass in an atom, do not get their mass from the Higgs field.
So we can dispense with that idea. The Higgs field is responsible for the mass of certain
elementary particles, but it's not responsible for the mass of protons and neutrons. And the story
of where they get their mass from, okay, I'm afraid that we'll have to leave that for the book.
But we don't have time for that right now. But now there's the question, okay, so electrons
do get their mass from the Higgs field. So do up quarks and down quarks. And so most of the
elementary particles that we're made from do get their masses from the Higgs field,
even if the more complicated objects, the protons and neutrons and therefore the atoms do not.
So simply because of that, it's clear that the Higgs field and gravity
can't be directly linked because protons and neutrons have lots of gravity, but they're not
really getting much mass from the Higgs field. So, and there are other reasons which we could
discuss, but let's leave that aside for now. So they're independent ideas. And now the question
comes, well, all right, so we started with this Margaret Thatcher in a room analogy,
where the Higgs field is like a crowd that slows people down as they try to move through it. And
the more well known they are, the harder they have. Okay, well, what's, what's wrong with that
is partly that it is in conflict with the principle of relativity, and that's pretty bad.
But in a way, the broader way in which it's wrong is that it suggests that the Higgs field has to do
with motion, and that it affects the properties of the motion of objects directly.
But that's not how it works. And we have to go back a moment and remember that what are, you know,
what electrons are electrons are waves in the electron field. And the Higgs field does not,
in some direct sense, give mass to electrons, it does not provide the energy
that an electron carries that gives it mass. What it actually does is it changes the properties
of the electron field. The Higgs field affects other fields. That's the real direct connection.
And the way in which it affects the electron field changes the way that the electron field vibrates.
And since electrons are vibrations in the electron field, that changes the properties
of electrons. So it's that more indirect route that is the way that the Higgs field does its thing.
And so really, the fundamental story is not how does the electron, how does the, sorry,
how does the Higgs field affect elementary particles? It's really how does the Higgs field
affect the fields whose waves are elementary particles? And so it's the interactions between
fields, the Higgs field and other fields that is at the fundamental heart of how the Higgs
field is able to affect the world in such a dramatic way. And just to add one side comment
to that, again, to just make sure it's all clear. The big news in 2012 was the discovery of the
Higgs boson, a type of particle. The type of particle is itself a ripple, a minimal wave,
in something. What is it a ripple in? It's a ripple in the Higgs field. So the discovery of
the Higgs particle was really not the big story. It was the means to an end. The discovery of the
Higgs particle proved that there must be a Higgs field because, you know, particles are just
manifestations of ripples of fields. And so the discovery of the Higgs field, that was the big
deal. The Higgs particle doesn't give mass to anything. And it doesn't affect anything. It's
despite the name God particle that's been given to it. It has essentially no role in the universe
at all. And if you make a Higgs particle, it's gone in a tiny fraction of a second. But the Higgs
field, that's another matter. It's present everywhere in the universe, just like the electromagnetic
field. But it has an additional feature that has allowed it to change the properties of other fields
and thereby the properties of elementary particles on which our lives fundamentally depend.
I'm fond of pointing out that we shouldn't call it the God particle anymore, because now we have
evidence that it exists. It goes over separately with different audiences, depending on who you're
talking to. But that was very helpful. Good. And I think that we can, you know, actually wind things
up with, this leads us directly to, you know, okay, mass, gravity, etc. You brought up the fact
that one way of thinking about gravity is through the gravitational field, which at the quantum
field theory level, looks like a spin two particle, the graviton. And I know that this is a lot of,
this is definitely an area where people struggle trying to understand what we physicists are
saying. Because on the one hand, we're saying, gravity is not a force, right? Einstein seemed
to imply that gravity is a feature of space time, not a force. On the other hand, it's a particle
just like the photon is a particle, which makes it seem kind of force like. And on the, well,
I mean, there's many hands we can go down here. But we don't understand gravity at the quantum
level. Is that an obstacle to talking about things like gravitons? Gravitons have never
been detected. Should we really be sure that they're there? I'm just going to dump all these
questions in your lap and give you 30 seconds to close it out. You get more than 30 seconds,
don't worry, but however long it takes. Well, I think the way to understand what we
know and don't know about gravity and what we suspect about how it works is really to make
sure that your understanding of electromagnetism and the photon is complete. Because the analogies
are almost exact. The notion that the electric force has to do with the exchange of photons,
this is another phrase that's common in the world of science communication. I hate it,
because I think it really fundamentally miscommunicates what particles are.
And what we learn in first year physics classes that electric forces are associated with the
electric field is still just as true as it was before people invented quantum mechanics. The
electric field does generate the effect that we call electric force. And to try to talk about it
in terms of photons moving back and forth is kind of a math trick and not fundamental from my
perspective to the actual physics. Photons, as we said, are the basic elements out of which
a light wave is constructed. Now, we can import these ideas to gravity, that gravity is caused
by the gravitational field, which itself, in this case, we have some idea of what it might be. It
reflects the curvature. It's the property of spacetime, which we call curvature.
And waves in the gravitational field, we call gravitational waves, just as a laser beam is a
very bright wave of light. The gravitational waves that were recently measured, they are very bright,
even though they are extraordinarily difficult to measure, and they're very dim by human standards.
They're extraordinarily bright by quantum standards. And if you could make a sufficiently dim
gravitational wave, you would discover that it's made from individual gravitons,
just as if you take a laser and make it sufficiently dim, you'll discover that it's made
from photons. Now, that is still conjecture, but that is the analogy that we make, and we believe
it's likely true. Unfortunately, to test it experimentally is far beyond current technology.
But as far as the math goes, that math analogy works just fine. The problems of quantum gravity
do not arise with that analogy. They arise when you try to make sense of the more quantum properties
of spacetime itself. And so that's sort of a more sophisticated application of quantum physics.
There's no problem with imagining gravitons. They can be put into the equations. They can be
calculated. One can even calculate things that they do, like scatter off of objects.
And so we have reason to think that gravitons may exist, but it's always possible that our
understanding of gravity is wrong and that some aspect of it will break down even before we get
to the quantum level. And if that's the case, then the story will be more complicated.
That's for experiment to decide. I would still argue, maybe disagree, but I would still argue
that there's essentially zero credence we should put on gravitons not existing. Maybe they're not
fundamental, but even in the wind, there's sound waves and we can quantize them to get phonons,
right? I mean, there's going to be something that is the quantum of the gravitational field,
whether it's fundamental or not. Well, this is an interesting physics point that I
am not 100% sure my own understanding is as good as it should be. It's kind of one of those things
which I looked into at some point. It's certainly true that sound waves in a piece of metal
are made out of phonons in the same way that light waves are made from photons.
But it is, I think, not the case that there are phonons in air. I think this is true.
This is something where I might be embarrassing myself here. The point is that
when the amplitude gets sufficiently low and you're trying to tell whether the
sound wave is really something you could pull apart, the whole structure of the material starts
to become important. So your ability to describe it as a collective wave breaks down before you
get to the quantum effects. I think it is possible that something similar is true for gravity.
And that we will have to change the way we talk about it before we really get to individual
quanta. And that if you try to get to individual quanta, you would discover that there's something
wrong about the way you're thinking of space and time. Now, again, I don't say this with 100%
confidence because I haven't actually worked through the math and tried to understand this
in detail. I do remember reading something of this sort. And so I think both you and I have
some reading to do to settle this issue. That's always true. And that's very helpful,
because that's a point I hadn't thought about. So that's useful. But maybe tell me if I'm
oversimplifying, but for the people out there who are still trying to get straight on whether
gravity is a force or not, I would say there's a language that says gravity is not a force,
it's the curvature of space time. There's another language that says gravity is a force that follows
the inverse square law, like Isaac Newton said. There's a third language that says gravity can
be thought of as a manifestation of a bunch of spin two particles grouped up into some condensate.
And all of these languages are correct. They're mutually incompatible. You had to choose one
at one time, but they all describe the same underlying phenomenon in slightly different
linguistic choices. Well, this is, I think, this reflects a very important aspect of physics and
mathematics that I view as one of the really important conceptual points that is
poorly understood outside of the experts. But even the experts forget about it. They know it.
And the first time we physicists learn that there's not going to be one unique language
for talking about anything is when we're learning Newtonian physics. Because we first learn everything
that everybody learns in first year of physics, which is that there are forces and there's
accelerations and that's the way you should describe things. And then we learn three entirely
different ways of saying the same thing. Lagrangians, Hamiltonians, Hamilton Jacobi theory, each one of
these is a different way of talking about Newton's laws. And you can prove mathematically that all
the predictions that you will get from these different ways of saying the same thing are identical.
Which means that there are multiple conceptual languages based on multiple ways of writing
down the same math, which have exactly the same experimental consequences and cannot be
distinguished by an experiment. So how should we think about this? Math can be written in
different ways. Adding a positive number to a negative number can be thought of a subtraction,
subtracting a positive number from a positive number. So is it addition or is it subtraction?
Well, clearly you could do it either way and if you wanted to base your world on addition
and negative numbers, you could view the world that way. And if you wanted to think about no,
all numbers are positive, but I can do addition or subtraction, that would be a different way to
do it. And there's nothing wrong with either one. But it might change the way you talk.
So the different languages which you described for talking about general relativity,
they are different ways of writing the math or viewing the math that have exactly the same
consequences. And so a professional will use any and all of them whenever a particular one is
convenient, will use that one. If it makes the calculation simpler, we'll use it. And what we
learn is that we should not be too wedded to a particular conceptual viewpoint. We simply can't
be. We can't decide on the basis of experiment which one of these viewpoints is correct, nor
should we try. The math is what we use to make predictions. The language in which we talk about
the math or the version of the math that we use, as long as they're literally identical in all
predictions, they are simply equivalent and common ways. Just like you can describe a table
using English or French or German, it doesn't make it any less a table.
I think that's a wonderful lesson to wrap up with. So Matt Straszler, thanks so much for being on
the Winescape podcast. Thank you very much, Sean.